1. Fundamental concepts in econometrics rely on the notion of repeated sampling from a population, but in practice repeated sampling is nearly impossible to implement. This makes these concepts hard to demonstrate and therefore abstract. Simulation can mimic repeated sampling and make abstract concepts concrete. Apart from being a demonstrative tool, simulation has key uses in estimation. It is used to evaluate whether an estimator has the desired statistical properties. It is a method to stress test the performance of an estimator against violations of the assumptions made when deriving the estimator. Sometimes an estimation problem involves an expression that does not have an analytical solution, but it can be approximated using simulation. Yet, if there is an analytical solution, simulation can be used to validate it. An econometric model can be complex and hard to estimate, but it can be approximated by an auxiliary model and estimated using simulation. This page contains exercises on simulation methods in econometrics. The exercises emphasize hands-on learning and intuitive understanding.
2. This page is work in progress. More exercises on bootstrap methods, Monte Carlo integration, methods of quasi-random number generation, maximum simulated likelihood, method of simulated moments, Markov Chain Monte Carlo, and indirect inference will appear in calendar year 2025.
3. MATLAB stands out as the programming language of choice due to its clean and intuitive syntax, and its excellent UI, which are superior to all alternatives. R or Python, for example, do not match the simplicity and elegance of MATLAB. These qualities make MATLAB particularly well-suited for educational purposes, aligning seamlessly with the pedagogical approach underlying all the exercises presented on this page.
4. The MATLAB code of an exercise is explained in a PDF file. A firm understanding of the MATLAB code, however, requires knowledge of programming in MATLAB. To support this, a MATLAB workshop has been created and is available in the 'Teaching' repository. The workshop is self-contained, assumes no prior knowledge of MATLAB, and progresses to advanced programming concepts.
5. Some of the exercises make use of the MATLAB function in the "exercise function" folder. The code in .m files require the Statisics and Machine Learning Toolbox of MATLAB.
6. To download the .m and PDF files, first click on a file and then click on the download button at the upper-right panel of the page.
7. Some of the exercises presented on this page are a collaborative effort. The contributors include Akash Boelens, Jesper Eizenga, Hartog Horsch, Renata-Maria Istrătescu, Quinten Salomons, Simonas Stravinskas, Jelmer Weiringa and Axel Zoons.
